source/10_introduction.md, before:


# Introduction {#sec:introduction}

The MaxEnt result depends on the entropic learning dynamics, so I guess it should be first (because that way I can start explaining prob, maxent, and then show the model). Maybe I should present some MCMC simulations as well? Let's see. Then I can talk about the choice of the Zeitgeist, and present extremism framework. For that I'll need to explain why I defer the MaxEnt model to the ViSuJeCa one. I guess that should be okay. Finally I can recover some distrust/antiferromagnetism with the last MF model. Yay!

Other things I have that I think do NOT fit in this thesis:

- graphical comparison between line segments and  tightness (same thing I "showed" Peter L and Gatsby);
- unfinished comparison between beta and tightness for different countries and political affiliations (maybe..? :sadface );
- unfinished analysis of the convincement problem

For the line segment/tightness thing, recall that I'm using the `moralmatrix.csv` file, not the whole `MFQ.csv` data. Also, instead of using some "arbitrary" 2 vectors from the data by hand, I can calculate the correlation matrix of it and take the 2 eigenvectors with greatest eigenvalues, can't I?

OLD ABSTRACT:

We model a society of agents who interact in pairs by exchanging for/against opinions about issues using a perceptron algorithm. Employing a maximum entropy analysis one can describe the interacting pair as a dynamics along the gradient of the logarithm of the evidence. This permits introducing an energy like quantity and an approximate global hamiltonian. Knowledge of the expected value of the hamiltonian is relevant information for the state of the society, inducing a canonical distribution by maximum entropy. We study the phase diagram of the society using a mean field approximation which indicate a phase transitions separating ordered and disordered phases depending on the society parameters.

Commit message:

Outline the introduction and put an outline in the introduction

source/10_introduction.md, after:


# Introduction {#sec:introduction}

Talk about how it is important that we study societies, introduce some concepts, some Haidt etc

Talk about how the tools from statmech can help us achieve those goals, because physics rock and inference rock even more!

Talk about previous works, even talk about opinion models (maybe their weaknesses?).

Finish with some questions and ideas that we are going to develop here.

Finish with an outline of this thesis

OLD ABSTRACT:

We model a society of agents who interact in pairs by exchanging for/against opinions about issues using a perceptron algorithm. Employing a maximum entropy analysis one can describe the interacting pair as a dynamics along the gradient of the logarithm of the evidence. This permits introducing an energy like quantity and an approximate global hamiltonian. Knowledge of the expected value of the hamiltonian is relevant information for the state of the society, inducing a canonical distribution by maximum entropy. We study the phase diagram of the society using a mean field approximation which indicate a phase transitions separating ordered and disordered phases depending on the society parameters.
